which was a pilot in Vietnam. And what was your date
of birth? September 17th, 1944. Okay, and you were
a pilot. Okay, what we're doing is going to begin an
interview concerning the war in Vietnam that he is
a veteran of. Okay, the first kind of question, and
of course you can stop me and go anywhere you like,
is I'd first like to know about your life prior to
Vietnam. What were your plans before Vietnam, and
what would you have been doing at that time if
Vietnam did not occur? My dad was career military.
He was in the Signal Corps and retired in 1964 as
Lieutenant Colonel. I went to the University of
Texas at El Paso. It was Texas Western, then it
became UT El Paso, and was in ROTC and completed my
ROTC requirements prior, about a year prior to
graduation. And it was because there was a high
demand for officers and pilots. They offered me a
commission prior to graduation, which
fortunately I declined and went ahead and
finished my degree. At the same time that they were
offering me the commission, I got married in
November of 66, graduated in January of 68,
and had
to report in April of 68 to Fort Gordon, Georgia,
because I had chosen my basic branch, Signal
Corps. The Army at that time did not have an
aviation branch. They needed you to have a basic
branch, and I chose Signal Corps because that's
what my dad was in and that's what I knew.
We went to California for a couple of months until
it was time to report and worked at Greyhound. in
the bagging department, making more money than I
made as a second lieutenant when I reported for
active duty. But we went to Fort Gordon. I was there
from April until the end of July. And in August,
actually end of July, first of August, I reported
to Fort Stewart, Georgia for the first phase of
flight school. And I was initial entry fixed wing
which meant airplanes as opposed to helicopters.
Helicopters are rotary wings. That's how we refer
to those. The first phase of flight school was four
months in Fort Stewart, learning how to fly T-41s,
their little Cessna 182s, high-wing fixed-gear
aircraft. And then we went to Fort Rucker,
Alabama, In December, for the second four months
of flight school, we had a little break in between.
And there I learned to fly the T-42, which is a beach
baron for instrument training. And then the bird
dog, which is also a Cessna high-wing observation
plane. Are you familiar with the bird dog? A little
bit. Okay. Pilot sits in the front. Observer or
instructor sits in the back. Tail wheel. And we
learned how to operate that in what they call a
tactical plane. means and tactical method. A lot
of low level flying, a lot of short field. So more of
a combat. More of a preparing us for what they
thought we would do in Vietnam. Turns out it wasn't
that much. We would practice firing artillery and
things like that. The artillery was the only thing
that they taught us in that phase that was really
useful.
But that's basically the way the training went
until May of 69, end of April, actually, first of
May. And you get a little leave, and we went to
California to see my parents. They live in Los
Angeles. And then in early May, I left for Vietnam
out of San Francisco. In 69? In 69. Now, that is
where I'll leave off for a moment en route to
Vietnam. You asked what I would be doing if I hadn't
gone there. It never entered my mind that I would
not go. Oh, really? I had planned on being in the
military from before I entered college. Spending
some time, I didn't know if I was going to make it a
career or not, but I planned on spending some time
in the military. I planned early on to take ROTC,
and since Vietnam was going on before I entered, or
about the time I entered college, they were
starting to build up and stuff like that, it just
seemed logical that I would go over there. There
was no concern or anticipation or anything
special. I just accepted that I would serve and
high probability that that's where I would serve,
one of the places I would serve, so it was no big
deal. What was your age when you... Let's see, when
I went in the Army in 68, I turned 24
in September of 68, so I was a little less than 24
when I entered the military. I was about 24 and a
half when I left for Vietnam. Did you feel that that
was comparatively older or younger? I didn't know
at the time, but I felt that that was about average.
It turns out that if you take the vast bulk of the
people who served there, it was actually a little
older. An awful lot of the troops were around 19.
And you can't say that the average age was 19, but
large number were in the 18 and 19 year category. We
even had officers, pilots who were warrant
officers and we had commissioned officers who
were infantry who'd gone through OCS basic
training and officer candidate school who were
very young, 20 and 21 years old. So we had a pretty
young force. What type of mental and or physical
preparations did you make before leaving to go to
Vietnam and were there any medical? Well you had to
get a battery of shots and they put us on medication
for malaria as a preventative. Pilots couldn't
take everything that everybody else could. We had
quinine is one of the preventatives and it
enhances your tendency towards vertigo. So we
couldn't take that, but we took all the other shots
and
we didn't do any special physical activities or
anything like that. Had I had it to do over again, we
would have. The pilots, they didn't feel needed to
do that. We did escape and evasion courses and we
did physical training tests, but not to the extent
that the Army does now. Right. nor to the extent
that I would recommend. Mental
preparation, really, again, you learn by doing. I
feel that there could have been a little bit more in
the way of information from people who had served
as to what you go through mentally once you get
there. And it may be different for everybody, so
maybe they can't do that, but I would have liked to
have had a little better feel for what a pilot doing
the kind of mission that I was going to do would go
through. The problem with that is that they don't
really know where you're going to go exactly until
you get there and start in processing, and we'll
get into that later, I'm sure. Okay. What was your
general feeling towards the government and
military before and
after? Well, my father's parents came from Soviet
Armenia, When he was in the Army, we lived in
Germany right after World War II in 1950. Well, not
right after World War II, but 1955, 1956. And we
knew people who had escaped from East Germany.
When we lived in Taiwan, I went to high school my
sophomore and junior years in Taipei, Taiwan. And
we knew people who had escaped from Red China.
These were not malcontents or people who were on
the dole. but successful professionals under the
communist systems. And they gave up the easy life
to get out of there and experience freedom. So
having come from that background, you might
consider me somewhat patriotic and very
supportive of the government. I also have very
strong feelings about communism that were borne
out, not changed by my service in Vietnam. Those
people do things as a matter of policy that are, I
think, less than human. And so I had no qualms at all
about fighting them at that time. This is getting
ahead a little bit, but on reflection, If we had to
do over again, I would rather have a policy where we
were fighting to win and where we were staying for
the duration instead of a one-year tour of duty
because we would have won. People will contradict
me on that, but we had the war won after 10 of 68. We
had them decimated. They were on their knees, and
we could have taken them out. We gave them
sanctuaries. both in North Vietnam at times,
definitely from ground incursions. And they
operated freely in Cambodia and Laos. And we
operated there, but with constraints. And so we
could have beaten them, but we had no intention.
The Johnson administration had no intention of
winning the war. They didn't know how to run a war.
They tried to micromanage from the White House
tactical targets and had the Vietnam War been
operated like World War II was in Europe under
Eisenhower when he was given the command to invade
the continent of Europe and defeat the enemy. And
that was the sum total of his mission. That's all
the interference that he got from Washington. And
the way Bush ran Desert Storm, and we turned it over
to the military, we could have won. The way it was
won was terrible, terrible. The way it was run was a
terrible waste. And it was almost criminal the way
some of the lives were squandered in Vietnam. And I
find that I'll never, never forgive the
administration at that time. By the time Nixon
took over, there was no nothing to do but get out.
The only question was, how do you get out? And so by
that time, the die was cast and we had to leave under
some form or another without trying to win. Did I
answer that question? Yes, you did. Did
you hear or know of people protesting the war
before you were sent? What was your reaction or
what would have been your reaction if you hadn't?
If you didn't hear about it before, what... I did
hear about it before, and I...
All war is immoral. I mean, there's no such thing as
a good war. You might say World War II came close,
but even it was... It could have been avoided had
the Allies stood up to Hitler prior to his...
conquest of Poland, etc.
So, war is not a good answer. I've been a student of
history since I was in junior high. I read
extensively about the Civil War, World War I and
World War II, as well as some of our minor efforts,
the Spanish-American War, etc., And the first
thing that struck me in junior high and high school
was the terrible waste of war, of materiel and
resources, but especially fine, fine people. I
mean, that would be productive members of
society, but they don't have that opportunity
because they're killed or maimed. So I have been
opposed to war all my life. I have felt, however,
there are times that it's necessary and you do it.
And I felt that at the time and still do that
communism is an intolerable government style.
And it was opposed to us. They had declared war on
us. And I felt that we had to do that. The
protesters, therefore, I felt were either
misguided, short-sighted, or malicious. And I
did oppose and would have opposed those
protesters, but then they've got the right to say
what they want to. So as long as we're a free
country, we shouldn't be afraid of ideas that are
different than ours.
The protests did wind up having an effect on me that
I guess we'll get into later on. Okay, what part or
what dates actually were you in Vietnam? How long
were you there? Well, I left on May 5th, which
started my clock ticking, May 5th of 69. And I went
to the Philippines first for jungle survival
school for a week. So I spent the first week in the
Philippines. And then I went to Vietnam and went
into Saigon and reported to the 90th Replacement
Depot. at Long Bend. And all they do is they start a
pipeline, and they sort of feed you through the
pipeline. And whoever has the greatest need gets
those people to come in. So I had no clue where I was
going. And the next thing they did was they sent me
to the 17th Group, which was part of the 1st
Aviation Brigade. And the 17th Group was located
at Nha Trang. and they'd say there's a plane
leaving such and such a time beyond it, and I'd just
show my orders and get on the plane and go. Went into
Natrang and spent the night there after
in-processing with the 17th group, again, not
knowing where I was going.
That night, I was sleeping in the top bunk of the top
floor of a wooden barracks and heard a noise, and it
woke me up. I was a very light sleeper all my life,
and it woke me up, And nobody else was moving, and I
didn't want to be the rookie on the block because
there were veterans there who were out processing
too. So I started to lay back down, and mortar
rounds started going off. And I looked around, and
I was all by myself. Everybody else was gone just
that fast. So I put some boots on and went out in the
bunker, and by that time it was all over. And they
didn't land all that close, so there was no real
danger, but it was amazing how What I had heard was
the sound of the mortar going down the tube and
being fired. And then the explosions after that is
what got everybody else's attention. But the next
day, I left Nha Trang and went to Quy Nhon, where I
was processed into the 223rd Aviation Battalion,
which is a primarily fixed-wing battalion. And
they sent me to Dong Ba Tin, which is across the bay
from Cam Ranh Bay. to the 183rd Reconnaissance
Airplane Company, because I knew I was going to fly
bird dogs. That was the only thing I'd been cleared
to fly. And that's a bird dog company. And they gave
me an in-processing that lasted about a week. So
I'd been gone from the States about three weeks
when I finally got sent down to Fanthiet, which was
the home of the second flight platoon. of the 183rd
reconnaissance airplane company. And Fanthiet
is on the coast. It was an ideal location. It was 90
miles due east of Saigon, 90 miles south of
Cameron. We were sort of left alone by our higher
headquarters as long as we did our job. And I stayed
there the entire year. So it was about a year and
three weeks or just a year and two? Well, I was there
a year and a day. When we talk about
out-processing, I'll tell you a little bit about
that, too. So, going in, they kind of gave you, you
mentioned before, a week in the jungle. Was that
actually on the ground? Yes. Learning how to...
They gave us a lot of instruction on escape and
evasion. and survival tactics in case we got shot
down and we were going to be flying primarily over
jungle and not entirely as it turned out for me
because I was on the coastal plain and then the
highlands also and a little triple canopy jungle
there but they would tell us how to avoid the enemy
what to do assuming you survived the crash what was
the first thing you did what was the second thing
you did how to get water how to determine if
something was edible. We would open a palm tree and
eat the hearts of palm right out of the palm tree and
catch water moisture that travels down palm
leaves at night because it's so humid it condenses
on them when it cools and things like that. The
checkout in country was how to fire the rockets and
a recheck on communications procedures and
artillery procedures. Do you remember, I guess
you had mentioned before, you kind of felt like the
whole time you were going, you were going to go to
Vietnam, but did it shock you at all when you really
got the news that you were actually going over
there at the time of day? No, the only thing that was
disappointing was further training once you
completed flight school, was determined by your
standing in your class in your branch. You had all
these different branches, and I was sonocore. And
I was number one in my class in my branch. And my
branch had a slot for OV-1s, which is the Mohawk,
which is a much more sophisticated, large,
twin-engine, turbine-powered aircraft. Really
a hot, hot thing to fly. And so that was my slot. But
the class leader who had seniority on me and who had
been on the ground in Vietnam for a year and had just
gotten back had not yet had a full year back in
Vietnam. So in order to extend him before he went
back over there, they gave him the Mohawk slot,
which stuck me in bird dogs. As it turns out,
whereas I would have enjoyed flying Mohawks, I had
such an interesting time. I got to see so many
different things. by flying bird dogs. I would
have been bored in Mohawks. And it turned out it was
the right thing for me. So it didn't, I mean I was
expecting the orders and it didn't bother me. Do
you feel that there were other attitudes than
yours? Do you feel like your attitude was unique
before going to Vietnam? How did the other men
feel? I don't know. I think probably about the
same. What you have to understand is But that was a
10 year war. So there was a lot of room for different
attitudes over time. At any one time, at the height
of the build up, there was 500,000 US troops in and
around Vietnam. A lot of different people with
different attitudes. There were different
branches of the service, Air Force, Army, Navy,
Marines. There were different branches within
the Army. There were all these different
assignments and units. And yet you could have two
people at the same unit at the same time
experiencing the same thing come away with two
different impressions of what happened. So
anything I say, you have to take with a grain of
salt. And therefore, I can't speak for anybody
else, really. I can tell you what some people did or
said, but I can't get inside their head. And I don't
think I was all that unusual. I know a lot of people
who were looking forward to going there. either
for their career enhancement or because they felt
about communism the way I did, or because of the...
I had one NCO when I was in training. We were
learning how to fire mortars in Officer's Basic.
And he'd been there three times and was trying to go
back again. He'd been wounded once. He still
wanted to go back. And he was a young, still young,
black NCO, non-commissioned officer, sergeant.
And he said, I want to go back again because that's
where the action is. This is my profession. That's
where my profession is being practiced. And a lot
of guys are that way. When you arrived in Vietnam,
were you surprised by anything? If so, what were
they? Or were you expecting everything you saw?
What were some of the things that stick out in your
mind about the way people lived, the land itself,
or the general culture? Well, it had a smell that
was different. A lot of the address of the women
were different, and some of the men, too. They did
wear pajamas a lot. The black pajamas. Yeah. I had
seen enough films, et cetera, that the
countryside was what I expected. I had lived in
Taiwan, so I expected the heat and humidity, and
that wasn't a surprise.
I guess the only thing, when I finally got down to
Fanfayette, got assigned to the second flight
platoon, the way they do call signs is each platoon
has a call sign. Actually, each company has a call
sign. And our company call sign was Seahorse. So
when you go to the second flight platoon, your call
sign is Seahorse to something. The 6 always
designates the commander, so the platoon leader
is Seahorse 2-6.
The company commander would be Seahorse 6. The
second flight platoon commander would be
Seahorse 2-6. I was Seahorse 2-2. You don't say 22,
you say 2-2. Well, when I got there, the fellow who
had had that call sign before me had been, I was
replacing him, he was shot down and killed about
two weeks before. And the first thing they told us
was that we had a lot of missions, reconnaissance
missions in the mountains, in this triple canopy
jungle area, and that we couldn't go in there
single ship because it was too far and too
dangerous. And all of a sudden, I thought, you
know, this might be a little dangerous. and I might
not survive this. And for a while, I thought that I
was scared for about the first couple of months
because about a month after I got there, they said,
we've got too many missions and too few pilots and
planes, and now you've got to fly in the mountains
in a single ship with nobody to back you up. And so it
was... All of a sudden, I didn't feel quite so well
prepared and so well trained. And I was, you know,
when I left, my son was nine months old, and I had
always felt sort of invulnerable. When I was in
high school and college, you know, I thought
nothing could touch me. I drove my car fast, and I
had my first crash in an airplane. It was in ROTC
flight training there in El Paso. My second crash
was in flight school. A guy, another student, was
riding the front seat and I was sitting in the back.
And he put a wing into the ground and very nearly
cartwheeled us and killed us. And we got out of that
and he almost put us in the trees on the way out. I had
a near midair with him flying in the front seat.
He's called his stick buddy, and he's a warrant
officer candidate. He's a good pilot. He just had
some mental lapses every now and then. We almost
hit a helicopter one day. So none of those things
bothered me. The crashes didn't bother me while
they were going on. It didn't bother me after they
were over. For some reason, it just didn't affect
me. But flying into those mountains by myself
after the guy before me had been killed, that's
sort of unsettling. And I felt a little vulnerable
at that time. And it wasn't until later that your
attitude changes, at least mine did. So I was a
little rattled there, of course. Could you
describe an average day, if there was one? What
times did you do things? Where were you? Well, I was
in Fanthia, and at first I lived out at what we
called the landing zone, or LZ. It was an airfield,
a pure steel planking runway. And we had a hangar
there, and some revetments made out of 50-gallon
oil drums, 55-gallon drums filled with sand. We
parked the aircraft in to protect them from mortar
attacks and things like that. And I'd get up before
dawn in the morning and get cleaned up. We had...
cold water showers. At least we had showers every
day. But they were cold water, and I don't care how
hot it is, a cold shower is a cold shower. And we wore
Nomex flight suits, which is, they're fire
retardant flight suits, and we were pretty
heavily armed. We put on our, I wore a .45 pistol and
a holster, and we had to have a canteen with you when
you fly. We'd have an M16. I'd have a survival vest,
and on top of the survival vest, the survival vest
wasn't flotation. It had a survival radio and all
the stuff you need to operate in the jungle, a
fishing line and a signal mirror and a survival
radio and a net and just a whole bunch of stuff. And
then I'd wear two bandoliers of M16 ammunition
with these clips, magazines. and an M16 and a
flight helmet. So I was pretty weighted down by the
time. And you'd have a morning mission and an
afternoon mission. And every so often we'd throw
in a noon mission just so you could keep guessing as
to when you were going to fly over their area
because all we were trying to do was spot them. They
were hiding from us and we were trying to find them.
And you'd have a mission in support of some unit or
some operation or another.
We would fly in support of the Navy. They'd send
cruisers and destroyers up and down the coast, and
they'd get into our province, and we'd put an
air-naval gunfire liaison or Anglico
enlisted man or officer in the back seat and go out
and fire missions with these naval ships. So I got
to see how the Navy operated. And mainly what they
did was they fired into... three fire zones at
bogus targets. I mean, we blew up the same hooch in
the same bunker all year. You know, you had to call
in a gun damage assessment or GDA just to justify
the expenditure of the rounds, but we blew up more
bushes than you can shake a stick at firing these
expensive rounds at them. It's not entirely
wasted, however, because what it does is it tells
the enemy that you just can't operate with
impunity in this free fire zone, that we're going
to at least give you a headache and a bloody nose if
we don't kill you. So the Navy was one mission.
Artillery was another. Artillery batteries had
to be registered. And so we had various
registration points. We'd go out and fire
registration. Visual reconnaissance was
another. We'd go out and look for signs of the
enemy. And if we found them, we'd call in whatever
we could, gunships, artillery,
reaction forces, depends on how many we found. I
flew in support of an outfit called the Second of
the First Cav, Second Squadron First Cav. They had
a cavalry as tanks and APCs, armored personnel
carriers. And they have a Delta Troop, which is
gunships, the AH-1 Cobra gunships. I flew in
support of the 192nd Assault Helicopter Company
and their gun platoon, which was what we called
Charlie Model, UH-1C gunships. Flew in support of
the...